# cancer-experiments-iiser
## Records of experiments pertaining to evolutionary dynamics in cancer @ IISER Pune

The primary aim of the line of work contained in this repository is to study context dependence in outcomes of somatic cellular competition; while mutants are widely observed in tumour populations, whether their selective advantage relative to non-mutants is permanent remains to be explored systematically. We propose that this selective advantage in combination with competing cellular phenotypes and the environment that mediates this competition. For example, growth factor (GF)-independent growth is likely to be advantageous only under conditions of GF depletion, as sufficient GF levels allow for growth of competing GF-dependent cells as well.

While extracellular conditions impose context for the selective advantage of somatic mutations, adaptation in somatic evolution need not be purely mutation-driven, and as detailed in the PDF file, phenotypic plasticity stemming from non-genetic hetereogeneity can act as important mediators of adaptive responses of cells. This plasticity can come from metastable states in cellular signaling networks, epigenetic diversity, and/or stochasticity at the cellular and population (of cells) levels. At least some part of this diversity is transiently, if not robustly, heritable, but importantly, these changes are reversible, and can therefore be an important aspect of somatic evolution. Reversible adaptive responses can be useful in helping tide over inhospitable conditions while not having to pay the price of a potential mismatch later under a different environmental regime. Therefore, an equally important aim of this line of work is then to understand the balance between reversible/plastic and irreversible adpative responses and the kinds of environmental conditions that underlie them.
